Title: Highly Efficient 3-in-1 FPGA-Based Unit Combining an ADC, DAC, and Multichannel Pulse Generator for Pulsed EPR Spectroscopy

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.16151v1

Published Time: Tue, 18 Aug 2026 01:38:38 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
> 1

# Highly Efficient 3-in-1 FPGA-Based Unit Combining an ADC, DAC, and Multichannel Pulse Generator for Pulsed EPR Spectroscopy 

N. P. Isaev, A. R. Melnikov, A. V. Vedkal, A. S. Ishchenko, A. M. Sokolov, E. A. Voronkov, and S. L. Veber 

Abstract —A hardware and software system for pulsed electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy is presented, built around a single PCI Express (PCIe) card that combines a 16-bit digital-to-analog converter (DAC) with a 10 GS/s effective sample rate, a 2.5 GS/s 14-bit analog-to-digital converter (ADC), and an 11-channel pulse generator on board. Custom firmware reloads the pulse-generator and DAC buffers and streams the digitized data in parallel with a running experiment, so that no time is lost on data input or output. The unit is integrated into the open-source Atomize software and controlled at the level of pulse sequences through a high-level Python application programming interface (API). Benchmarking with a four-pulse double electron– electron resonance (DEER) sequence shows that the card reaches close to 100% time efficiency for accumulation times of a few milliseconds per pulse sequence, even for demanding arbitrary waveform generator (AWG) protocols. Although demonstrated for a single sequence, the efficiency proved insensitive to the number of pulses, the number of measurement points, or the phase-cycling depth, so that comparable performance is expected for any protocol whose shot repetition time exceeds the ∼2 ms reprogramming time of the card. The on-the-fly reprogramming, which makes every successive sequence fully independent, also enables nonuniform sampling and acquisition. The system design, its firmware, the Python API, and its performance in pulsed EPR applications are described. 

Index Terms —Arbitrary waveform generation and waveform measurement, data acquisition and conversion, electron paramag-netic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy, FPGA-based reconfigurable instrumentation, magnetic resonance instrumentation. 

Manuscript received XX Month 2026; revised XX Month 2026; accepted XX Month 2026. (N. P. Isaev and A. R. Melnikov contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding authors: N. P. Isaev; A. R. Melnikov.) 

This work was supported in part by the Russian Science Foundation under Grant 23-73-00042. This article has supplementary downloadable material provided by the authors: a complete Atomize script for the four-pulse DEER measurement used for the benchmarks reported here. It is available as an ancillary file accompanying this preprint. N. P. Isaev is with the Voevodsky Institute of Chemical Kinetics and Com-bustion, Siberian Branch, Russian Academy of Sciences, 630090 Novosibirsk, Russia (e-mail: isaev@kinetics.nsc.ru). A. R. Melnikov and S. L. Veber are with the International Tomography Center, Siberian Branch, Russian Academy of Sciences, 630090 Novosibirsk, Russia, and also with the Synchrotron Radiation Facility “SKIF,” 630090 Novosibirsk, Russia (e-mail: anatoly.melnikov@tomo.nsc.ru). A. V. Vedkal is with the Synchrotron Radiation Facility “SKIF,” 630090 Novosibirsk, Russia. A. S. Ishchenko is with the International Tomography Center, Siberian Branch, Russian Academy of Sciences, 630090 Novosibirsk, Russia, and also with Novosibirsk State University, 630090 Novosibirsk, Russia. A. M. Sokolov and E. A. Voronkov are with Instrumental Systems, 117587 Moscow, Russia. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Pulsed electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy is a powerful tool for studying the properties of paramagnetic centers, their nuclear environment, and nanometer distances between them using pulsed dipolar spectroscopy (PDS) [1], [2], [3]. PDS is primarily used in structural biology to measure distances between spin-labeled sites on proteins [4], [5], [6], to study the structure of proteins and their complexes, and how these structures change during protein functioning. Measuring a few distances in a protein cannot be compared with obtaining the entire protein structure using methods such as X-ray diffraction [7], [8] or cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) [9], [10], but EPR spectroscopy has its advantages as a tool for refining and expanding data from these two methods. First, it yields distance distributions, which enables the study of mobile proteins that may adopt multiple conformations in the sample, unlike X-ray and cryo-EM, for which mobility seri-ously interferes with crystallization or with obtaining a clear image, respectively. Second, it is environment-independent: it can work with any protein in any environment (solvent, lipid membrane, micelles, etc.), since spin-coherence characteristics do not depend on the interspin medium. Finally, PDS requires relatively small amounts of protein; a typical sample volume for the 34 GHz spectrometer is 5 μL and the minimum suitable concentration is in the 1–10 μM range [11]. The need for PDS methods is beginning to be recognized by the structural biology community, since protein mobility is an integral part of their functioning, and PDS can then add the necessary mobility information to the knowledge of their 3D structure obtained from other methods or modeling [12]. On the other hand, the interest and need for pulsed EPR spectrometers in the structural biology community is held back by the cost of the spectrometers. Weighing the cost against the extractable information, the cost side strongly outweighs the information side for all biological laboratories at present. The aim of this work is to develop cost-efficient equipment that provides an optimized scheme for the entire spectrometer in terms of both sensitivity and cost. Pulsed microwave (MW) bridges of EPR spectrometers form their pulses and detect the EPR signal in one of three ways, distinguished by how the pulses are generated and, decisively, by whether the working band is separated far enough from the local oscillator (LO) to be filtered. (i) In pulse slicing, pulses are cut from a continuous source by fast MW switches and phased with switched phase shifters, arXiv:2608.16151v1 [physics.chem-ph] 17 Aug 2026 2

as in commercial Bruker spectrometers and their modifications [13], [14]. Operating with pulses of different phase requires either multiple channels with separate phase shifters, as in the Bruker Elexsys, or a single fast phase shifter, as in a custom-built spectrometer with a 20 ns 0/90 /180 /270 ◦ switch [15]. (ii) In near-zero/unfiltered synthesis, a digital-to-analog con-verter (DAC) synthesizes the pulses, but the working band is not separated from the LO and its mirror and therefore cannot be filtered against them: either a low-frequency DAC (output 

< 1 GHz) places the signal near zero frequency, [16], [17], [15] or the synthesized band is up-converted to the operating band with the LO and mirror bands left unfiltered [18]. In the near-zero case the positive and negative frequencies fold through zero, and detection at zero frequency without full phase cycling increases experimental noise [15]. Both slicing and near-zero/unfiltered synthesis suffer from LO leakage wherever an in-phase/quadrature (IQ) mixer is used. Regardless of the DAC resolution, an analog IQ mixer always leaks residual LO power set by its finite LO–RF (radio frequency) isolation, which no digital control can remove, so an attenuator is required to minimize it. (iii) In intermediate-frequency (IF) synthesis, the pulses are synthesized at an IF shifted from the source by more than 1 GHz, with more than 1 GHz of bandwidth, far enough that the LO and mirror bands can be filtered out [19], [20]. Such a bandwidth is typically enough to work with different resonators and samples of different permittivity [21]. The low-MW-power part then operates only as continuous-wave (CW) up- and down-converters and needs no fast switches or phase shifters, which makes its design price-efficient, and the leakage, amplitude-imbalance, and multiple-pathway problems that constrain the first two approaches either vanish or are easily corrected. Previously, this price gain could not com-pensate for the more expensive set of necessary analog-to-digital converters (ADCs) and DACs, but this article shows that this is no longer the case, and that systems operating at up to 5 GHz, 10 GS/s effective sample rate and more than 1 GHz bandwidth can reduce the final cost of a pulsed EPR spectrometer. Generation and detection take place entirely at the intermediate frequency, so the same pulse-generation and digitization electronics serve any operating band, such as X-, Q-, or W-band. Only the microwave bridge (the mixers, synthesizers, and filters for the target range) is swapped. Another problem is effective data transfer: since this IF spectrometer requires control at much higher rates, it also involves large amounts of data input and output compared to classic spectrometers, which calls for additional optimization. This paper presents a hardware and software system, including a PCIe card with a 16-bit DAC at a 10 GS/s effective sample rate, a 2.5 GS/s 14-bit ADC and an 11-channel pulse generator on board, and its custom firmware which allows data input and output in parallel with a running experiment. The system is integrated with the Atomize open-source software [22], [23], which altogether allows performing pulsed EPR experiments with almost 100% time efficiency, meaning no time is lost during the writing of commands to the card or the reading of data from it. The system design, its firmware development, the details of the high-level Python application programming in-terface (API), and its performance in pulsed EPR applications are demonstrated. Although developed here for pulsed EPR, the proposed hardware and software approach is not limited to it and can be adapted to other experimental platforms and techniques that generate very large volumes of data, where the efficient use of expensive measurement time is a decisive factor. II. S YSTEM DESIGN 

Figure 1 shows the connections the card must provide. The following input and output channels are required to operate the IF pulsed EPR spectrometer: a DAC-generated pulse input at IF, pulse high-power amplifier (HPA) control, low-noise amplifier (LNA) protection control, and an ADC input for the EPR signal at IF. The design looks simple, because the low-power IF MW-bridge part operates in CW mode, since no MW can penetrate the high-pass filter (HPF) without DAC pulses. A single PCIe card with a fast DAC and ADC on board could therefore provide all the control of the spectrometer. Since every card of this type has a field-programmable gate array (FPGA) and, in most cases, a digital signal connector, it allows implementation of a multichannel transistor-transistor logic (TTL) pulse generator on its base through development of special firmware. Because the DAC, ADC and pulse generator reside on the same board and run from a single on-board reference clock, they are inherently synchronized: there is no need to distribute and phase-lock separate clocks between the generation and detection paths, as in multicard designs. There is no relative clock drift and no jitter to degrade the phase coherence between excitation and detection or the timing of the pulse generator. An external reference input (clock in) allows the on-board clock to be locked to another instrument, and an external trigger input (trigger in) allows a pulse sequence to be started by an external event. All of this is collected in Fig. 1: the three modules, the shared on-board reference clock, and the flow of information between the card, the host PC, and the IF pulsed EPR microwave bridge. Integrating the three modules on a single card carries a higher one-time development cost, but per card it is signif-icantly cheaper in serial production. Two such cards have already been built, and the savings relative to the six separate cards used in our previous design have already offset that development cost [15]. 

A. DAC/AWG 

The DAC operates as an arbitrary waveform generator (AWG), and its performance was optimized for pulsed EPR needs, which do not require more than a 1.25 GHz frequency sweep in one pulse in most experiments. The AD9176 chip (Analog Devices, USA) is a 4-channel DAC with a real data rate of 1.25 GS/s per channel. Its four channels are combined into two complex outputs: 8× on-chip interpolation brings the I and Q streams up to the 10 GS/s core sample rate of the DAC, i.e., a Nyquist range of 5 GHz, and a digital IQ mixer driven by an internal LO frequency generator then shifts the signal to the desired frequency. This on-chip up-conversion functions without the inherent LO leakage of analog MW mixers, so 33-in-1 FPGA-based unit (one PCIe card)      

> PC with Atomize software IF pulsed EPR MW bridge Clock system RAM (DDR4)
> FPGA (Kintex XCKU060)
> Pulse generator (11 TTL channels) PCIe 3.0 ×8 interface DAC/AWG (AD9176) 16-bit, 1.25 GS/s (10 GS/s effective) out: 0.01–5 GHz ADC (AD9208) 14-bit, 2.5 GS/s in: 0.01–5 GHz
> pulse sequence EPR signal DAC buffer data bus clock in trigger in clock buffers DAC buffer EPR signal trigger trigger IQIQTTL trigger/control lines
> digital data analog data TTL trigger/control clock
> clock clock

Fig. 1. Block diagram of the integrated unit. A single PCIe card hosts three modules: the DAC/AWG, the ADC, and the multichannel TTL pulse generator implemented in the FPGA firmware. All three run from a common on-board reference clock. Arrows show the information flow: digital data exchanged with the host PC over the PCIe 3.0 ×8 interface; analog I/Q signals exchanged with the IF pulsed EPR microwave bridge; and TTL lines from the pulse generator, which trigger the DAC, start the ADC, gate the high-power amplifier, and switch the low-noise amplifier protection in the bridge, keeping every path on a single on-board time base. The card also accepts an external reference at clock in and an external start signal at trigger in, so the unit can be locked to and triggered by other instruments. 

the output can be shifted anywhere within the 0.01–5 GHz output band. The LO is set from 0 to 5 GHz on a grid of 312.5 MHz; frequencies between grid points are reached with the I/Q waveform itself, which at the 1.25 GS/s data rate spans 

±625 MHz around the LO, so the coarse LO grid does not restrict the accessible frequencies. As with the MW IQ mixer, one has to define the LO frequency and write the data to the I and Q channels to obtain the desired RF output. The pulse-position step is set by the 1.25 GS/s data rate and equals 0.8 ns, which is sufficient for all pulsed EPR experiments; the DAC parameters are summarized in Table I. The DAC is started by an internal trigger from the pulse generator, transmitted over the card bus, and the trigger length determines the length of the DAC output signal. Every pulse in an output sequence is an independent entity: its waveform is synthesized separately, stored in the DAC buffer, and played back by its own trigger from the pulse generator, so that shape, length, intermediate frequency, phase, and amplitude are all set pulse by pulse (Section III-D). They may differ between neighboring pulses of the same shot as much as between successive shots, within the ±625 MHz that the 1.25 GS/s I/Q data rate spans around the digital LO, which is fixed for the whole sequence. The output amplitude corresponds to −1.7 dBm, which lies in the linear regime of IQ mixers like the Marki MMIQ-0218L (Marki Microwave, USA), whose up-conversion input P1dB 

is 2 dBm. The DAC output can therefore be connected to the mixer I and Q inputs directly. Thus, the choice of such a DAC chip is cost-effective and supports pulsed EPR experiments at intermediate frequencies with close to optimal parameters. 

B. ADC 

The ADC chip AD9208 (Analog Devices, USA) is specified in Table I. It is started by an internal trigger from the pulse generator, transmitted over the card bus; the trigger length sets the digitization window (the registration duration is unlimited), and it supports on-board averaging up to 65535 times. The performance of this ADC together with the input-bandwidth parameters allows working in any of the four Nyquist zones: 0.01–1.25, 1.25–2.5, 2.5–3.75, and 3.75–5 GHz. Operating in a higher zone is a form of bandpass (undersampling) detection, an approach used earlier in EPR for time-locked subsampling [24]: the analog bandpass filtering in the MW bridge restricts the input to the chosen zone, so that noise from the other zones is not aliased into the digitized band. The fourth zone enables effective filtering of the LO and mirror bands in both the receiver and the transmitter, which allows the LO to be tuned over a 3 GHz range. Shifting the middle of the 1.25 GHz observation/generation window accordingly provides more than 4 GHz of IF spectrometer bandwidth, enough to satisfy the vast majority of pulsed experiment requirements. 

C. Pulse Generator 

The pulse generator was developed on the base of a Kintex UltraScale XCKU060 FPGA (AMD/Xilinx, USA) used in the InSys 126P card; its parameters are listed in Table I. The 32-bit hold-time field is clocked at 312.5 MHz (1.25 GHz/4, coherent with the DAC; 3.2 ns per tick), so a single time interval can be held from 3.2 ns to 232 × 3.2 ns ≈ 13 .74 s. Because the pulse generator merely triggers the DAC and ADC and activates the 4         

> TABLE I KEY PARAMETERS OF THE THREE ON-B OARD MODULES (DAC/AWG, ADC, AND MULTICHANNEL PULSE GENERATOR )

DAC/AWG 

Chip AD9176 Analog outputs 2, 50 Ωa

Resolution 16 bit I/Q data rate per output 1.25 GS/s Core sample rate 10 GS/s ( 8× interpolation) Output amplitude ±0.26 V ( −1.7 dBm) Output bandwidth 0.01–5 GHz LO tuning grid 312.5 MHz Instantaneous bandwidth 1.25 GHz 

ADC 

Chip AD9208 Analog inputs 2, 50 Ωb

Resolution 14 bit Sample rate per input 2.5 GS/s Input range ±1.5 VInput bandwidth 0.01–5 GHz c

Sustained output rate 6 GB/s Registration window 3.2 ns–50 μs d

On-board averaging up to 65535 

Pulse generator 

FPGA Kintex UltraScale XCKU060 Core frequency 312.5 MHz Time step 3.2 ns Channels 11 Pulse amplitude > 2.8 V at 330 Ω

Pulse fronts 1.4 ns Max. single time interval ≈ 13 .74 sMax. number of time intervals 622 Synchronization external trigger and clock 

> aTwo independent real RF outputs: the four 1.25 GS/s DAC cores of the AD9176 are paired into two complex (I/Q) channels, and on-chip digital up-conversion turns each I/Q pair into one real RF output. Each output is therefore programmed by a complex 16-bit waveform, and the two outputs can be connected directly to the I and Q ports of an analog IQ mixer.
> bTwo independent real inputs; in quadrature detection they carry the I and Q outputs of the MW bridge, and the down-conversion of the intermediate frequency is performed in software (Section III-D).
> cSpans four Nyquist zones of the 2.5 GS/s sampling; a zone above the first is used in bandpass (undersampling) detection, with the MW bridge restricting the input to the chosen zone (Section II-B).
> dNot a strict limit; a longer registration window increases the data-processing overhead (see Section IV).

HPA and LNA protection in the IF pulsed MW bridge, its 3.2 ns time resolution is fully adequate for these tasks. III. F IRMWARE 

The goal of this work was to make the three modules (ADC, DAC and pulse generator) operate pulsed EPR ex-periments with 100% time efficiency. This means that there is no overhead for data input/output to run the next pulse sequence with fully independent AWG pulse positions and shapes, which gives complete freedom to conduct the pulsed EPR experiment. This freedom was implemented in the spectrometer of [15], where it enabled nonuniform sampling and fully symmetrical phase cycling (4 phases for each pulse) for fixed delays in the AWG pulse sequence before moving on to the next delays. The ability to start another AWG sequence greatly helps to tune AWG experiments, since real-time phase cycling with AWG pulses can be performed while tuning. With the AWG echo spectrum available, the resonator dip position, the AWG pulse frequency and the magnetic field could easily be adjusted. The problem of that earlier design was the use of three different PCI/PCIe cards (ADC, DAC and pulse generator) which did not know about each other, so starting a new AWG pulse sequence required several steps with time penalties: calculating the pulse program and loading it into the pulse generator (not less than 1 ms); calculating the AWG program and loading it into the DAC card (not less than 1 ms); the ADC measurement; transferring the data (not less than 0.1 ms); and simple mathematical operations (usually 1–10 μs, which can be done in a parallel thread). Moving on to the next measurement point therefore took about 2–5 ms. This overhead is negligible when each pulse sequence is accumulated for several tens or even hundreds of milliseconds before the next one is started. When the accumulation time per sequence is reduced to on the order of 10 ms, however, the overhead becomes a substantial fraction of the total experiment time. Such short per-sequence accumulation is often unavoidable for experiments with a large phase cycle or a large number of measurement points: accumulating longer would stretch a single scan to an hour or more, and since the hardware can drift slightly over such timescales, the data must instead be collected by repeating short scans many times. Eliminating this overhead in IF spectrometers is therefore the principal goal of the present design. 

A. Firmware Operation With the Pulse Generator Module 

In order to provide continuous operation of the pulse generator, it is necessary to record the next pulse sequence while the current one is operating. This is achieved by having two independent FIFO (first in, first out) buffers, one of which is being executed while the other is simultaneously rewritten/reflashed. To ensure that information is delivered without delay, we chose the nonburst data transfer mode, which bypasses stan-dard PCIe data packeting and writes data directly to the desired memory location. The speed of such recording is slower, at around 100 MB/s (or 100 kB/ms). Although slower than the maximum speed of 8 GB/s for the PCIe 3.0 ×8 on which this card operates, it is quite sufficient for filling the pulse-sequence buffers. The pulse sequences are represented as consecutive time intervals that contain information about which channel should be activated and for how long. A time interval has 48 bits: 11 for channels, 5 unused, and 32 to set the duration of that specified state of the outputs (Fig. 2). This time interval is further expanded to 256 bits and transmitted to the card. The maximum number of time intervals is 622. In the worst case, when none of the pulse edges coincide, each pulse consumes two time intervals (its own duration and the following gap), which corresponds to a maximum of 311 pulses per sequence, counted across all channels. The execution of pulse sequences occurs in a cyclic mode; there is no waiting mode between pulse sequences. At the 5(a) Pulse sequence → intervals (11 channels @ 312.5 MHz)                           

> MW AMPLIFIER PROTECTION DETECTION I0 I1 I2 I3 I4 I5 I6 I7 I8 I9 I10
> (b) Pulse-generator control word (48-bit →8 × uint32) w0 w1 w2 w3 w4 w5 w6 w7
> 48 info bits 208 zero bits (padding)
> [47:16] hold time (32 b) [15] LAST [14:11] [10:0] 11 channels
> hold time = interval duration, in 3.2 ns ticks (1/312.5 MHz)
> (c) Control-word buffer + two pulse sequence FIFOs
> I0 I1

· · · I(last) 

> bit15 LAST FIFO bank 0
> nPS = 0, 2, …
> FIFO bank 1
> nPS = 1, 3, … one PS loads while the other plays

Fig. 2. Multichannel TTL pulse-generator buffer. (a) A pulse sequence is sliced into constant-output time intervals on the pulse-generator channels; the MW, amplifier, protection and detection channels shown here are only an example, and other control channels (e.g., AWG, laser triggers) can be defined in the same way. (b) Each interval is encoded as a 48-bit pulse-generator control word (32-bit hold time, the LAST flag that marks the final interval of the sequence, and the 11 channel bits) padded to 8× uint32. (c) The control-word buffer feeds two pulse-sequence FIFOs: one is played while the other is reloaded. 

start of the experiment, the first pulse sequence is written into one buffer and execution begins immediately; the second sequence is written into the other buffer while the first is already running. The execution of the first buffer and the seamless transition to the second buffer raises a flag signaling readiness to rewrite the first buffer, which starts the rewriting process. Another flag is raised upon completion of writing to the nonexecuting buffer. A final flag is read after an execution sequence is complete. If the final flag is raised, execution of the pulse sequence switches seamlessly to the other buffer. Otherwise, a repeated measurement of the current sequence is performed. Each pulse sequence contains its own identifier, so that repeated and consecutive measurement steps are never mixed up [see also Fig. 4(b)]. 

B. Firmware Operation With the DAC/AWG Module 

The DAC module is handled in exactly the same way: two independent FIFO buffers, one of which is played while the other is reloaded, so that the waveform for the next pulse sequence is written while the current sequence is being executed. In addition to the pulse-generator words, the host writes the DAC waveform buffers themselves to the card at the same time. The DAC array for each channel has 16-bit complex data: 16 bits for the I and 16 bits for the Q part of the data. Each time sample occupies 32 bits for one channel or 64 bits for two channels. The relative phase of the two output channels (a) DAC bu ff er (int16 @ 1.25 GS/s)           

> P0 · π/2 (SINE) P1 · π(SINE) P2 · Gauss CH0 CH1 len(CH0) = Σpulse lengths = 4 · dac_window
> (b) Per-sample interleave
> −CH0 −CH1 +CH1 +CH0
> sample 0
> −CH0 −CH1 +CH1 +CH0
> sample 1

· · · 4 int16 per time sample, written to the FIFO      

> (c) Double-bu ff ered DAC FIFO
> n = 0 n = 1 n = 2 n = 3 experimental points
> FIFO bank 0
> n = 0, 2, …
> FIFO bank 1
> n = 1, 3, … one bank loads while the other plays

Fig. 3. DAC/AWG buffer. (a) The two int16 sample arrays of the AWG output channels CH0 and CH1 (1.25 GS/s), with the AWG pulses packed back-to-back; for pulsed EPR, CH1 is generated from CH0 with a 90 ◦ phase shift. (b) Four interleaved int16 values are written to the FIFO per time sample: with the two arrays in quadrature they supply the I and Q parts of both channels (−CH0, −CH1, +CH1, +CH0). (c) The two FIFO banks are reloaded per experimental point: one bank loads while the other plays. 

is set by the user; for the pulsed EPR experiments reported here it is 90 ◦, so that the same two arrays also provide the I and Q parts of both channels. The array spans the combined length of all DAC pulses in the sequence, which are packed back-to-back (Fig. 3). These two 1.25 GS/s I/Q channels are up-converted on-chip by the digital IQ mixer into two RF outputs at the 10 GS/s core sample rate. The length of the DAC trigger pulse, generated by the pulse generator, determines the length of the DAC output signal. The DAC buffer holds the entire pulse sequence, so each pulse-generator trigger plays back only the corresponding pulse from it. The buffer is cyclic, so that the repeated shots used for signal averaging reuse it without reprogramming. 

C. Firmware Operation With the ADC Module 

The ADC can be triggered by the pulse generator only once per pulse sequence, and can digitize any number of data points, determined by the length of the trigger pulse. The only limit to the amount of digitized data is that the raw data flow must not exceed the rate at which the card can stream it to the host. The ADC module has two 14-bit channels with a sampling rate of 2.5 GS/s, and each sample of each channel is stored as a 32-bit integer, so during acquisition the raw data flow reaches 20 GB/s. This exceeds both the 8 GB/s theoretical bandwidth of the PCIe 3.0 ×8 interface and the 6 GB/s rate that the card sustains in practice (Table I). Thus, it is not possible to run fully continuous experiments, but the card allows digitizing 

≈ 30% of all time. The ADC has a buffer of 64 units that are circularly rewritten. The size of each unit can be controlled by the user (from 32 KiB up to 4096 KiB). A quarter of this buffer 6(a) Driver DMA bu ff er (int32 stream @ 2.5 GS/s)                             

> zero padding (only fi rst ~¼ is data) n = 0 n = 0 n = 1 n = 1 packet split at bu ff er end →joined in next bu ff er header payload padding
> (b) Packet anatomy (adc_window·16 + 8 int32) header (8 words) SIG w1 nw3 w4 Nav w6 w7 payload: interleaved I/Q I0 Q0 I1 Q1 I2 Q2 · · · word[0] = HEADER_SIG = 0xAA5500FF word[2] = n (pulse sequence id) Nav = N averaged (summed registrations on board) data_raw[n·full_adc : (n+1)·full_adc]
> (c) Logical indexing n = exp_point · N_phase + phase_index
> n = 0
> +x
> n = 1
> -x
> n = 2
> +y
> n = 3
> -y
> n = 4
> +x
> n = 5
> -x
> n = 6
> +y
> n = 7
> -y · · ·
> phase points (1 experimental point) point 0 point 1
> phase cycling
> answer[points, samples] (complex64)
> point 0 point 1 point 2 point 3

Fig. 4. ADC streaming buffer. (a) The driver direct memory access (DMA) buffer is a flat int32 stream of back-to-back packets (only the first quarter holds data). (b) Packet anatomy: an 8-word header (signature, pulse-sequence id n, number of averages) followed by the interleaved I/Q payload. (c) Logical indexing assigns each packet the index n = exp point · Nphase + phase index; phase cycling then combines the Nphase packets of each experimental point into the final answer[points, samples] array. 

is occupied by digitized data; the rest is filled with zeros (Fig. 4). Each digitized window also has a header with the pulse-sequence number, the measurement number, the number of on-board averages, etc. This ensures that their assignment to the pulse sequence is unambiguously interpreted. Thus, even if the user selects a suboptimal run time for one pulse sequence that is not sufficient to reflash the second buffer, the spectrometer will operate at 100% efficiency by making several repeated measurements of that pulse sequence. The data will be provided to the user, who can decide whether to use it to enhance signal averaging or to discard it. 

D. Firmware Operation With the High-Level Python Software 

The low-level firmware has an API written in the C pro-gramming language. The API has all the functions necessary to efficiently operate the unit and transfer the data from the internal memory to the PC. In order to further simplify interac-tion with the card, we created a high-level Python module for the Atomize software [22] using ctypes . The Python module consists of three parts: the pulse generator, DAC, and ADC. In the pulse-generator part of the module, pulse sequences are converted internally to the firmware format from user-friendly input. The latter is self-explanatory to pulsed EPR experi-mentalists and is based on several keyword arguments of the function pulser_pulse , namely ’channel’ , ’start’ ,

’length’ , ’delta_start’ , ’length_increment’ 

and ’phase_list’ . Phase programs are specified through 

’phase_list’ either explicitly (’+x’ , ’-x’ , ’+y’ ,

’-y’ ) or in the compact bracket notation [25] ( [x] , (x) ,etc.); the digitizer_expand_phase_cycling func-tion expands the compact form into the full phase table and computes the corresponding detection phase from the selected coherence-transfer pathway. The user can change the positions, phases, pulse durations and repetition rate of the pulse se-quence using several specialized functions: pulser_shift ,

pulser_increment , pulser_repetition_rate , etc. The progress of the experiment is controlled by the functions pulser_next_phase , pulser_update and 

pulser_pulse_reset . The most important functions and their main arguments are summarized in Table II. The DAC part of the high-level module generally mim-ics the pulse generator. There is an awg_pulse function with several additional keywords required to describe DAC pulses: ’func’ , ’frequency’ , ’amplitude’ , etc. The 

’func’ keyword sets the pulse shape: constant-amplitude, Gaussian, sinc, WURST and sech/tanh envelopes are available, the last two being frequency-swept (adiabatic) pulses. For these swept pulses, the awg_correction function applies a resonator-profile predistortion that compensates the ampli-tude and phase response of the resonator across the swept band. Positions, durations and increments of the DAC pulses are controlled by corresponding trigger pulses generated by the multichannel pulse generator. The phase of the pulses is controlled by the keyword ’phase_list’ , and phase cycling can be initiated by the awg_next_phase function. Without phase cycling, the DAC module can be launched by the awg_update function. Overlapping AWG pulses are supported: when pulses share a time interval their waveforms are summed sample-by-sample into the same array and clipped to the 16-bit DAC range, as required for composite- and shaped-pulse schemes. Two independent FIFO buffers are handled automatically for both the pulse generator and the DAC module, and the DAC buffer is not recomputed from scratch on every step: each pulse waveform is cached against its defining parameters (shape, length, frequency, phase, ampli-tude, etc.), so when the next experimental point only changes the pulse timing (that is, it moves the pulse-generator triggers in time while leaving every pulse shape unchanged), the cached samples are reused and the time-expensive waveform synthesis is skipped. DAC buffers are processed using NumPy arrays [26] and converted to a format suitable for the low-level firmware using ctypes .The ADC part of the module has two main functions, namely digitizer_get_curve and 

digitizer_number_of_averages . The second function is simple and straightforward by its name, while the purpose and implementation details of the first are quite complex. To ensure maximum efficiency of PCIe-bus usage, data from the ADC are transferred only when at least one of the 64 buffer units is filled. A single unit usually holds the data of several experimental points, so the 

digitizer_get_curve function either transfers the data of a filled unit from the buffer to the PC or simply returns without action if no unit is filled yet. The data are transferred to the Python module using the numpy.frombuffer 

function. After that, using the pulse-sequence number from the ADC data header, the number of points, and the number of 7          

> TABLE II MOST IMPORTANT FUNCTIONS AND THEIR MAIN ARGUMENTS IN THE HIGH -L EVEL PYTHON API, G ROUPED BY ON-B OARD MODULE

Function Main arguments Purpose 

Pulse generator 

pulser_pulse ’channel’ , ’start’ , ’length’ ,

’delta_start’ ,

’length_increment’ ,

’phase_list’ 

Define a TTL pulse: channel, position, duration, per-step increments, phase program 

pulser_shift /

pulser_increment 

pulse names Step pulse positions / lengths during a sweep 

pulser_next_phase — Advance the pulse generator to the next entry of ’phase_list’ (phase cycling) 

pulser_update — Write the pulse sequence to the generator and start it (without phase cycling) 

pulser_pulse_reset pulse names Restore pulses to their defined positions and lengths 

pulser_repetition_ rate 

rate Set the shot repetition rate 

DAC/AWG 

awg_pulse ’func’ , ’frequency’ ,

’amplitude’ , ’start’ , ’length’ ,

’delta_start’ ,

’length_increment’ ,

’phase_list’ 

Define an AWG pulse: shape, intermediate frequency, amplitude, position, duration, per-step increments, phase program, etc. 

awg_shift /

awg_increment 

pulse names Step AWG pulse positions / lengths during a sweep 

awg_next_phase — Advance the AWG to the next entry of 

’phase_list’ (phase cycling) 

awg_update — Load and start the AWG output (without phase cycling) 

awg_pulse_reset pulse names Restore AWG pulses to their defined positions and lengths 

awg_correction ’model’ , ’phase_correction’ ,

’f0’ , ’q_factor’ 

Resonator-profile predistortion (amplitude and phase) of swept AWG pulses 

ADC 

digitizer_get_curve ’partial’ , ’integral’ ,

’skip_redundant’ 

Acquire and phase-cycle the signal; ’partial’ 

returns only the points updated since the previous call (for incremental plotting), with optional integration in the API and dropping of redundant repetitions 

digitizer_at_exit ’integral’ Final readout at the end of the experiment (and in Stop handlers): waits for the background processing to finish and returns the exact accumulated arrays, full or integrated 

digitizer_demodulate I and Q arrays, ’freq’ , ’ph’ , ’ph1’ ,

’ph2’ , ’integral’ 

Digital down-conversion of the acquired traces: demodulate the I and Q quadratures at the (negative) AWG pulse frequency ’freq’ , apply zero-, first-and second-order phase corrections, and return the full demodulated trace or its integral over the detection window 

digitizer_number_ of_averages 

number Set the number of averages per phase 

digitizer_decimation factor Reduce the effective sample rate for long detection windows (applied on the fly while the stream is accumulated) 

digitizer_processing_ thread 0/1 Background processing of the ADC stream (enabled by default): buffers are averaged, normalized and phase-combined in a worker thread that overlaps the acquisition 

digitizer_expand_ phase_cycling 

per-pulse phase programs Expand the compact (bracket) phase notation into the full phase table and derive the detection phase from the coherence-transfer pathway 8                                                                          

> 1for kin general.scans(SCANS): 2for jin range(POINTS): 3for iin range(PHASES): 45pb.awg_next_phase() 6pb.pulser_update() 78a, b, rng =pb.digitizer_get_curve( 9POINTS, PHASES, 10 current_scan =k, total_scan = SCANS, 11 partial =True) 12 13 if ais not None: 14 i0, i1 =rng 15 data[0][:, i0:i1] =a16 data[1][:, i0:i1] =b17 general.update_2d( 18 EXP_NAME, data, i0, i1, ...) 19 20 pb.pulser_shift() 21 pb.awg_shift() 22 23 pb.pulser_pulse_reset() 24 pb.awg_pulse_reset()
> Fig. 5. Python code required to perform a general pulsed EPR experiment with AWG pulses and phase cycling. The definition of the pulses and other parameters, such as the array data for storing the results and the numbers of points and phases, are omitted for clarity. Called with partial=True ,
> digitizer_get_curve returns the two signal quadratures for only the measurement points completed since the previous call, together with their index range rng , unpacked as i0, i1 (the half-open point range [i0:i1)
> of data that changed). It returns None when no new ADC buffer has arrived, and that iteration is skipped. Those points are written into the persistent 2D array data and sent to the live plot with update_2d , which redraws only
> [i0:i1) rather than the whole frame, so the per-readout cost scales with the size of the update instead of the size of the array.

phases in the experiment specified as function arguments, the received array is processed into a final array corresponding to the quantity measured in the pulsed experiment. If there is phase cycling in the experiment, the function also performs it, according to the detection-phase array given by the keyword ’acq_cycle’ . By design, all of this processing (parsing the packet stream, accumulation of the running average, normalization, and phase cycling) is carried out in a background thread: digitizer_get_curve only hands the transferred units to that thread and immediately returns the measurement points completed since the previous call, so the data handling overlaps the acquisition instead of delaying it (Section IV). The background processing can be switched off with the digitizer_processing_thread 

function. At the end of the experiment the final data are read out with digitizer_at_exit , which waits for the processing thread to finish the queued units and recomputes the accumulated arrays, so the saved data are always complete on every exit path. Apart from the final data, it is also possible to explicitly see the number of repetitions of each point in the pulse sequence. Due to the design of the card, these numbers may exceed the number of averages specified in the digitizer_number_of_averages function by an integer factor. Such extra repetitions occur when the next pulse sequence cannot be written to the card in time and the current one is repeated instead (Section III-A), i.e., when the data-acquisition time per point of the pulse sequence is less than the ∼2 ms on-the-fly reprogramming time. There is also a special regime of the digitizer_get_curve 

function in which an integration of the data in a given window is performed. Finally, when AWG pulses are used, the EPR signal is sampled at the intermediate frequency, so the companion function digitizer_demodulate 

performs the digital down-conversion: it demodulates the I and Q traces at the (negative) AWG pulse frequency, applies zero-, first- and second-order phase corrections, and, like the integration regime above, can return either the full demodulated trace or its integral over the detection window. More general information about how the module is designed in the Atomize software can be found elsewhere [22], [23]. The high-level module described above allows for a clear and concise description of the pulsed experiment, given in Fig. 5. The figure shows the Python code required to perform a general pulsed EPR experiment with AWG pulses and phase cycling. For clarity, the definition of the pulses and other parameters is omitted. A detailed example of a complete experimental script, a standard four-pulse DEER/PELDOR (double electron–electron resonance / pulsed electron–electron double resonance) measurement, is provided as supplementary material; the benchmarks of Section IV were run with the same script by varying the parameters listed there. IV. O VERALL SYSTEM PERFORMANCE 

The time efficiency of the integrated unit was characterized directly in a typical pulsed EPR experiment. All benchmarks were run on a workstation with a 32-core AMD Ryzen Threadripper 3970X processor and 128 GiB of RAM, running Ubuntu 22.04.3 LTS (Linux kernel 6.5.0). The benchmark was built around a four-pulse DEER experiment, run on the spectrometer from [27]. All pulses were synthesized by the on-board DAC at intermediate frequency and sine-shaped: the three observer pulses at 130 MHz, each 44.8 ns long, with the π/ 2 pulse set to half the amplitude of the two π pulses, and a 16 ns pump π pulse at 200 MHz. The DEER trace was acquired by stepping the position of the pump pulse in 3.2 ns increments over 500 measurement points, using a 480 ns detection window (0.4 ns step), a simple two-step phase cycle, and a 1 kHz repetition rate. Throughout, the entire detection window, i.e., the so-called direct dimension [28], is transferred, processed, and plotted, rather than reduced on the fly to a single integrated value. The acquired data set is therefore intrinsically two-dimensional, spanning the direct (detection-window) dimension against the indirect dimension swept by the experiment, which makes the input/output load, and hence the efficiency benchmarked below, correspondingly heavier than for integrated detection. Starting from this baseline, each parameter that governs the data input/output load — the ADC buffer size, the number of pulses in the sequence, the detection-window length, the number of measurement points, and the number of phases — was varied in turn while the others were held fixed. These scans are reported in the panels of Fig. 6. The time per pulse sequence [Fig. 6(a)], shown for several ADC buffer sizes, was varied either through the repetition rate (down to 0.5 ms) or through the number of averages. For example, averaging 2 times at each step of the phase cycle at a 1 kHz repetition rate corresponds to 9Time per Pulse Sequence (ms) 0.5 1 2 3 5 10 25 Efficiency (%) 40 60 80 100 Detection Window (ns) 480 960 1920 3840 7680 Efficiency (%) 85 90 95 100 Number of Pulses 4 8 12 16 20 30 Efficiency (%) 20 40 60 80 100 Number of Measurement Points 100 200 300 500 1000 2000 4000 Efficiency (%) 96 97 98 99 100 Number of Phases 2 4 8 16 32 Efficiency (%) 99.0 99.5 100.0 Measurement Point Number 0 200 400 600 800 1000 Counts 01234(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) Buffer Size (KiB): 512 1024 2048 4096 Time per Pulse Sequence: 5 ms 2 ms 5 ms, plotting 2 ms, plotting Time per Pulse Sequence: 5 ms 2 ms Time per Pulse Sequence: 5 ms 2 ms 5 ms, plotting 2 ms, plotting Time per Pulse Sequence: 5 ms 5 ms, 20 MW Pulses 2 ms Time per Pulse Sequence: 5 ms 2 ms 

Fig. 6. Time efficiency of the integrated unit, benchmarked with a four-pulse DEER sequence. (a)–(e) Efficiency ( test /t meas × 100% ) versus (a) the acquisition time per pulse sequence for several ADC buffer sizes, (b) the detection-window length, (c) the number of pulses, (d) the number of measurement points, and (e) the number of phases. The benchmarks in (a)–(c), (e), and (f) were performed with live data plotting enabled, as in routine operation; panels (b) and (d) additionally isolate its cost, comparing the curves labeled “plotting” in the legend, in which the display is updated on each new ADC buffer arrival (filled symbols, dashed lines), with the otherwise identical scans where plotting is suppressed (open symbols, solid lines). The two nearly coincide, so live plotting adds only marginal overhead. (f) Number of counts recorded at each measurement point during a single scan at 2 ms and 5 ms per pulse sequence. For clarity, the individual steps of the phase cycle are here treated as separate measurement points. The final point (shaded) carries the redundant buffer-fill repetitions and is excluded from the efficiency in (a)–(e). 

2 ms per pulse sequence. Each new phase triggers a full reprogramming of the card, so each phase-cycle step is handled exactly like an entirely new pulse sequence with arbitrary parameters and DAC waveforms. The dependence on sequence length [Fig. 6(c)] was probed by extending the observer block with additional refocusing pulses, up to 30 MW pulses. The total number of pulses created in the API is higher than the number of MW pulses defined since each MW pulse has its own auto-generated protection and amplifier pulses. The efficiency is defined as the fraction of the total experiment time ( tmeas ) that is actually spent running pulse sequences: efficiency = test /t meas × 100% , where test is the estimated time the card would need if every pulse sequence contributed to the data with no dead time. In each benchmark, five identical scans were acquired and the measured time was averaged over the scans, excluding the final measurement point, whose buffer-fill overhead [Fig. 6(f)] is a fixed one-time cost rather than a steady-state contribution. Figure 6(a) shows the card efficiency as a function of the time per pulse sequence, measured for several ADC buffer sizes. In this benchmark all pulse-sequence parameters were kept constant, which makes it possible to estimate the time needed to reprogram the card. At approximately 1 ms per pulse sequence the API begins to approach 100% efficiency; the sharp drop below 1 ms occurs when a new pulse sequence cannot be written to memory in time, so the current one is repeated instead (Section III-A). The measured efficiency is essentially independent of the buffer size: every size tested reaches 99.5–99.9% at 5 ms per pulse sequence, and only near the 1 ms roll-off does a larger buffer help marginally, because it is processed less frequently and is therefore less exposed to an occasional late sequence write. The buffer size instead sets a trade-off that matters elsewhere: a larger buffer is copied out of the driver less often, which lowers the per-buffer overhead that becomes visible for long detection windows [Fig. 6(b)], whereas a smaller buffer is processed more frequently and refreshes the live display faster, giving a more responsive data flow. A buffer of 1024–2048 KiB balances the two for typical 10 

experiments, and at low ( < 50 Hz) and high ( > 5000 Hz) repetition rates the buffer size is adjusted automatically in the API. By design, the processing overhead of the high-level Python API is largely independent of the number of pulses in the sequence or the number of detection phases. The benchmark confirms this: at 5 ms per pulse sequence the efficiency stays flat at 99.5% as the number of pulses [Fig. 6(c)] and the number of phases [Fig. 6(e)] are varied, because the pulse-generator and DAC buffers are reloaded in parallel with execution, and each ADC buffer has a fixed size that is processed as soon as it is ready, independent of the number of pulses or phases. The two-fold drop observed at 2 ms per pulse sequence for 18 or more MW pulses is again caused by repetition of the current pulse sequence (Section III-A), which indicates that the reprogramming time of the card is close to 2 ms for the parameters used here. Nevertheless, 5 ms per pulse sequence is sufficient to reach >99% time efficiency even for 20 MW pulses with a 32-step phase cycle, which is more than enough for pulsed EPR experiments [Fig. 6(e)]. On each ADC-buffer readout, the Python API updates and returns only the measurement points completed since the pre-vious readout, and the live display is refreshed incrementally with just those points, so the per-readout cost is set by the few points that changed rather than by the whole data set. The display is handled off the measurement loop as well: the plotting call passes the new points to a separate coalescing worker thread and returns within microseconds, and that thread pushes only the latest update to the display, dropping any that is superseded before it is drawn, so a slow display never restricts the acquisition. The efficiency is therefore essentially independent of the number of measurement points [Fig. 6(d)], staying near 99% from 100 to 4000 points, and the scans with live plotting (filled symbols, dashed lines) and with plotting suppressed (open symbols, solid lines) nearly coincide. The small remaining offset from 100% behaves as a fixed cost rather than a per-point one: the absolute overhead per scan stays near 10 ms whether the scan lasts 0.4 s or 16 s, and most of it is incurred once at the start of the first scan, when the ADC stream is started, the accumulator arrays are allocated, and the display is created. The slow rise of the efficiency with the number of points [Fig. 6(d)] and phases [Fig. 6(e)] is simply this constant overhead spread over an increasingly long scan. A weaker dependence remains on the detection-window length [Fig. 6(b)]. Unlike the number of pulses, phases, or measurement points, the window length changes the volume of the digitized data itself: every measurement point contributes one complex sample per 0.4 ns of the window, so at 7.7 μs the card streams sixteen times more raw data than at 480 ns. The API is designed to keep the handling of this stream off the acquisition timeline. The per-sample work (summation into the running average, normalization, and phase combination) is fused into a single pass over the data, and that pass runs in a dedicated background thread which consumes each ADC buffer while the card is already filling the next one. The readout call only hands the arrived buffer to this thread and returns the measurement points completed since the previous call. The one step that cannot leave the acquisition loop is copying each 2048 KiB buffer out of the driver, which takes a few milliseconds. Following one buffer shows what this remainder means: at a 480 ns window one buffer holds about 210 pulse sequences and the card needs 420 ms (at 2 ms per pulse sequence) to fill it, whereas at 7.7 μs the same buffer holds only 13 pulse sequences and is refilled every ≈26 ms, so the same few-millisecond copy consumes a sixteen times larger share of the timeline. The benchmark follows this picture: at 2 ms per pulse sequence the efficiency stays above 94% up to 3.8 μs and reaches 89–90% at 7.7 μs, whereas at 5 ms per pulse sequence it stays at or above 98% over the whole range. For the detection windows typical of pulsed EPR (below 1 μs) the card thus runs at roughly 99% time efficiency. When an even longer window is required, the data volume can be lowered at the source: the native 0.4 ns sample spacing is usually finer than required and can be coarsened with the digitizer_decimation function, which averages each group of consecutive samples already while the stream is accumulated (acting as an antialiasing filter, so out-of-band noise is not folded into the retained band and the signal-to-noise ratio is preserved), or the window can be integrated on the fly (the ’integral’ keyword of 

digitizer_get_curve ) to return a single value per point. The overhead can also be reduced from the other side, by increasing the ADC buffer size up to 4096 KiB, so that each buffer accumulates more measurement points and the fixed cost of copying a buffer out of the driver is paid a smaller share of the acquisition time. The scans with and without live plotting in Fig. 6(b) separate slightly only at 2 ms per pulse sequence. The display itself never paces the acquisition (the plotting call returns within microseconds, and a coalescing worker thread pushes only the latest update); but that thread shares the processor with the acquisition loop, and at 2 ms per pulse sequence, the reprogramming leaves almost no headroom, so occasionally a delayed sequence write makes the card repeat the current sequence (Section III-A), costing another whole repetition. At 5 ms per pulse sequence the same work fits into the available slack, and plotting adds nothing at any window. Finally, Fig. 6(f) shows the number of counts recorded at each measurement point over a single scan (whereas the efficiency in the other panels is averaged over five), both at 2 ms and 5 ms per pulse sequence, so that the ideal count is one per point. Since the buffer processing is decoupled from the acquisition, the arrival of an ADC buffer does not interrupt the pulse train, and the counts stay at the ideal value across essentially the whole run, apart from isolated points near the start of the scan. The only exception is the very last point of the experiment, which always car-ries substantial redundant acquisition, because the final ADC buffer on the card must be completely filled before it can be transferred to the API. The Python API supports both options: (i) keeping the redundant repetitions or (ii) discarding them, controlled by the ’skip_redundant’ keyword of the digitizer_get_curve function. The former allows 100% of the experimental time to improve the measurement even for nonoptimal card parameters, since the redundant 11 

repetitions still contribute to the signal averaging. V. C ONCLUSION 

A single-board PCIe FPGA solution integrating a 16-bit DAC at a 10 GS/s effective sample rate, a 2.5 GS/s 14-bit ADC (both with up to 5 GHz bandwidth), and an 11-channel pulse generator has been presented for pulsed EPR spectroscopy. The three modules share a common firmware that records the next pulse sequence and reloads the DAC and pulse-generator buffers while the current sequence is still running, and that streams the digitized data over the PCIe bus through a custom transfer format. As a result, data input and output proceed in parallel with the experiment, and virtually no measurement time is lost to reading or writing. The card is fully integrated into the open-source Atomize software through a high-level Python API, so that a complete experiment is defined and controlled at the level of pulse sequences rather than firmware. Benchmarking with a four-pulse DEER sequence showed that the unit reaches close to 100% time efficiency for realistic conditions: an accumulation of about 5 ms per pulse sequence, limited by the ∼2 ms repro-gramming time of the card, is sufficient, and the efficiency is essentially independent of the other experimental parameters, such as the number of pulses, the number of measurement points, and the phase-cycling depth. The only residual cost scales with the number of ADC samples acquired per point, i.e., the detection-window length, and can be kept negligible by decimation or on-the-fly integration in the Python API. Live plotting, offloaded to a separate coalescing worker thread, adds essentially nothing, and even the redundant buffer-fill repetitions can be retained to contribute to the signal averaging so that no measurement time is wasted. Because every pulse sequence is reprogrammed on the fly without dead time, the number of averages and the posi-tions of the measurement points can be varied freely during the experiment, so that nonuniform sampling [15], [29] and nonuniform acquisition [15], [30] are supported natively at no cost in time efficiency. More generally, since each acquisition step reprograms the card in full, successive sequences may differ arbitrarily in their parameters and DAC waveforms at no additional cost, leaving the experimenter free to tailor the measurement protocol. A further consequence of the seamless cyclic operation of the pulse generator (Section III-A) is that the shot-to-shot timing stays constant throughout an entire experiment: the card never halts the pulse train to reload and advances to the next sequence only at a sequence boundary, so the repetition period is preserved when an interpulse delay τ , the phase-cycle step, or the magnetic field B0 is changed. This matters whenever the sample contains slowly relaxing spins. When several paramagnetic species with overlapping spectra are present, relaxing them fully would require pulsing, for example, at < 20 Hz instead of the > 1 kHz allowed by the spins of interest, at a large cost in sensitivity. Pulsing rapidly instead drives the slow spins into a steady state in which they contribute only a constant background. On instruments that stop and reload the pulse programmer at every step, this steady state is disturbed after each change and the first few shots carry a variable, ill-defined background; here it is perturbed only once, at the very first point of the experiment, which can simply be discarded. The same deterministic behavior benefits any measurement that must pulse rapidly to gain sensitivity, experiments in which the pulse generator also triggers a laser at a fixed rate, and field-swept experiments, where a constant interstep timing keeps the average B0 at each step identical on every scan. Together, the high time efficiency and the on-the-fly flex-ibility described above translate into a practical advantage. The proposed unit helps to lower one of the barriers that have kept many structural-biology laboratories from routine access to pulsed dipolar EPR spectroscopy, by making an intermediate-frequency architecture both data-efficient and af-fordable. Combining this 3-in-1 board with a price-optimized IF microwave bridge should enable compact, cost-effective, and high-throughput pulsed EPR spectrometers. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The development of the low-level firmware for the 3-in-1 FPGA unit and the development of the high-level Python API for the ADC and DAC were funded by the Russian Science Foundation, grant number 23-73-00042. A.R.M., A.S.I., and S.L.V. thank the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Russian Federation for granting access to the equipment for testing the high-level Python API. A.V.V. thanks the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Russian Federation within the governmental order for SRF SKIF Boreskov Institute of Catalysis for granting access to the equipment for developing the high-level Python API for the TTL pulse generator. The authors thank M. K. Bowman for ideas, useful discussions, and advice, as well as M. V. Fedin for his contribution at an early stage of the project. REFERENCES [1] P. E. Spindler, P. Sch¨ ops, A. M. Bowen, B. Endeward, and T. F. Prisner, “Shaped pulses in EPR,” eMagRes , vol. 5, p. 1477, 2016. [2] G. Jeschke, “Dipolar spectroscopy – double-resonance methods,” eMa-gRes , vol. 5, p. 1459, 2016. [3] S. Van Doorslaer, “Hyperfine spectroscopy: ESEEM,” eMagRes , vol. 6, p. 51, 2017. [4] R. Dastvan and S. Stoll, “Recent advances in quantifying protein conformational ensembles with dipolar EPR spectroscopy,” Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. , vol. 94, p. 103139, 2025. [5] G. Jeschke, “The contribution of modern EPR to structural biology,”           

> Emerg. Top. Life Sci. , vol. 2, p. 9, 2018. [6] D. Goldfarb, “Exploring protein conformations in vitro and in cell with EPR distance measurements,” Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. , vol. 75, p. 102398, 2022. [7] P. V. Afonine, A. Albert, K. Diederichs, J. A. Hermoso, E. Krissinel, J. A. M´ arquez, S. Panjikar, M. Sol` a, A. Thorn, and I. Us´ on, “Macro-molecular crystallography,” Nat. Rev. Methods Primers , vol. 5, p. 64, 2025. [8] I. Rathore, V. Mishra, and P. Bhaumik, “Advancements in macromolec-ular crystallography: from past to present,” Emerg. Top. Life Sci. , vol. 5, p. 127, 2021. [9] E. Nogales and J. Mahamid, “Bridging structural and cell biology with cryo-electron microscopy,” Nature , vol. 628, p. 47, 2024. [10] M. Guaita, S. C. Watters, and S. Loerch, “Recent advances and current trends in cryo-electron microscopy,” Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. , vol. 77, p. 102484, 2022. 12

[11] O. Schiemann, C. A. Heubach, D. Abdullin, K. Ackermann, M. Azarkh, E. G. Bagryanskaya, M. Drescher, B. Endeward, J. H. Freed, L. Galazzo, D. Goldfarb, T. Hett, L. Esteban Hofer, L. F´ abregas Ib´ a˜ nez, E. J. Hustedt, S. Kucher, I. Kuprov, J. E. Lovett, A. Meyer, S. Ruthstein, S. Saxena, S. Stoll, C. R. Timmel, M. Di Valentin, H. S. Mchaourab, T. F. Prisner, B. E. Bode, E. Bordignon, M. Bennati, and G. Jeschke, “Benchmark test and guidelines for DEER/PELDOR experiments on nitroxide-labeled biomolecules,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. , vol. 143, no. 43, pp. 17 875–17 890, 2021. [12] J. Jumper, R. Evans, A. Pritzel, T. Green, M. Figurnov, O. Ronneberger, K. Tunyasuvunakool, R. Bates, A. ˇ Z´ ıdek, A. Potapenko et al. , “Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold,” Nature , vol. 596, no. 7873, pp. 583–589, 2021. [13] Y. Polyhach, E. Bordignon, R. Tschaggelar, S. Gandra, A. Godt, and G. Jeschke, “High sensitivity and versatility of the DEER experiment on nitroxide radical pairs at Q-band frequencies,” Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. , vol. 14, no. 30, pp. 10 762–10 773, 2012. [14] P. Sch¨ ops, P. E. Spindler, A. Marko, and T. F. Prisner, “Broadband spin echoes and broadband SIFTER in EPR,” J. Magn. Reson. , vol. 250, pp. 55–62, 2015. [15] N. P. Isaev, A. R. Melnikov, K. A. Lomanovich, M. V. Dugin, M. Y. Ivanov, D. N. Polovyanenko, S. L. Veber, M. K. Bowman, and E. G. Bagryanskaya, “A broadband pulse epr spectrometer for high-throughput measurements in the X-band,” J. Magn. Reson. Open , vol. 14–15, p. 100092, 2023. [16] T. Kaufmann, T. J. Keller, J. M. Franck, R. P. Barnes, S. J. Glaser, J. M. Martinis, and S. Han, “DAC-board based X-band EPR spectrometer with arbitrary waveform control,” J. Magn. Reson. , vol. 235, pp. 95–108, 2013. [17] A. Doll, “Pulsed and continuous-wave magnetic resonance spectroscopy using a low-cost software-defined radio,” AIP Adv. , vol. 9, no. 11, p. 115110, 2019. [18] M. V. Hanabe Subramanya, J. Marbey, K. Kundu, J. E. McKay, and S. Hill, “Broadband Fourier-transform-detected EPR at W-band,” Appl. Magn. Reson. , vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 165–181, 2023. [19] A. Doll and G. Jeschke, “Fourier-transform electron spin resonance with bandwidth-compensated chirp pulses,” J. Magn. Reson. , vol. 246, pp. 18–26, 2014. [20] A. Doll and G. Jeschke, “Wideband frequency-swept excitation in pulsed EPR spectroscopy,” J. Magn. Reson. , vol. 280, pp. 46–62, 2017. [21] R. Tschaggelar, F. D. Breitgoff, O. Oberh¨ ansli, M. Qi, A. Godt, and G. Jeschke, “High-bandwidth Q-band EPR resonators,” Appl. Magn. Reson. , vol. 48, p. 1273, 2017. [22] A. Melnikov, A. Vedkal, A. Ishchenko, and S. Veber, “Atomize: A modular software for control and automation of scientific and industrial instruments,” Journal of Open Research Software , vol. 13, no. 1, p. 26, 2025. [23] A. Melnikov, “Atomize documentation,” https://anatoly1010.github.io/ atomize docs/, accessed: 2026-06-29. [24] J. S. Hyde, H. S. Mchaourab, T. G. Camenisch, J. J. Ratke, R. W. Cox, and W. Froncisz, “Electron paramagnetic resonance detection by time-locked subsampling,” Rev. Sci. Instrum. , vol. 69, no. 7, pp. 2622–2628, 1998. [25] S. Stoll and B. Kasumaj, “Phase cycling in electron spin echo envelope modulation,” Appl. Magn. Reson. , vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 15–32, 2008. [26] C. R. Harris, K. J. Millman, S. J. van der Walt et al. , “Array program-ming with NumPy,” Nature , vol. 585, pp. 357–362, 2020. [27] A. V. Borodulina, A. R. Melnikov, A. A. Samsonenko, O. Y. Rogozh-nikova, V. M. Tormyshev, M. V. Fedin, and S. L. Veber, “Monitoring 

S = 0 ↔ S = 2 spin-state switching in Fe(II) complex using FT EPR and trityl radical as local magnetic field sensor,” Appl. Magn. Reson. ,vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 1535–1547, 2025. [28] M. K. Bowman and A. G. Maryasov, “The direct dimension in pulse EPR,” Appl. Magn. Reson. , vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1041–1062, 2021. [29] A. G. Matveeva, V. N. Syryamina, V. M. Nekrasov, and M. K. Bowman, “Non-uniform sampling in pulse dipolar spectroscopy by EPR: the redistribution of noise and the optimization of data acquisition,” Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. , vol. 23, pp. 10 335–10 346, 2021. [30] V. M. Nekrasov, A. G. Matveeva, V. N. Syryamina, S. A. Agarkin, and M. K. Bowman, “Analytically optimized noise redistribution in pulsed dipolar EPR spectroscopy,” Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. , vol. 27, pp. 3272– 3281, 2025.